README.md, before:

# Bowel Sound Classification – Digehealth Interview Project

This repository contains an end-to-end solution for **automatic classification of bowel sounds (BS)** using deep learning.  
The project was developed as part of a technical interview for **Digehealth**.  

---

## Problem Statement
Bowel sounds are typically classified into:
- **0 – No sound (silence / noise)**
- **1 – Burst noise (b / mb)**
- **2 – Harmonic noise (h)**  

The goal is to build a **robust classification pipeline** that:
1. Loads and preprocesses raw audio recordings. Make sure the files have same sampling rate by decimating to 8000 Hz.  
2. Segments the audio into short windows (like spectrogram frames).  
3. Trains a **CNN-based classifier** with a first transformation into Mel-spectrogram (Wang et al., 2022).
4. Evaluates the model on a separate test file.  
5. Exports the trained model to **ONNX** for deployment.  

---

## Project Structure

```
src/
 ├── rc_digehealth_test/
 │    ├── classifiers/       # CNN model definition + training loop
 │    ├── preprocessors/     # Filtering utilities (Butterworth)
 │    ├── utils/             # File loader, segmentation, gap filling, period detection
 │
tests/
 ├── train_test_cnn.py       # Main training + evaluation + visualization script
 └── ...
```

---

## Main Components

### 1. Data Handling (`DigeHealthFile`)
- Loads `.wav` audio files (optionally decimated to 8 kHz).  
- Loads `.txt` annotation files with **start, end, label**.  
- Provides segmentation via sliding windows (`get_segmented_data`).  
- Options:
  - Window size (`segment_size_sec`)  
  - Hop size in second (`hop`)  
  - Normalization (z-score)
  - Label grouping (`b` + `mb` → burst noise)  

### 2. Preprocessing (`ButterFilter`)
- High-pass or band-pass **Butterworth filtering** to remove low-frequency noise.  
- Implemented with `scipy.signal.sosfiltfilt` 
- The Filter classes have an apply method that is called by the objects to which the filter is given

### 3. CNN Classifier (`BowelSoundCNN`) based on (Wang et al., 2022)
- input: Tensors of shape (N, 480). 480 corresponds to 60 milliseconds at sampling rate 8000
- Transformation: Mel-spectrograms (128 bands × short time frames).  
- Architecture:
  - 3 convolutional + ReLU + max-pool blocks  
  - Dropout  
  - Fully-connected layer (64)  
  - Output layer with softmax over 3 classes (noise, burst, harmonic).  

### 4. Training (`train_model`)
- Loss: Cross-entropy.  
- Optimizer: Adadelta (as in the reference paper)
- Class imbalance handled via **WeightedRandomSampler**.  
- **Early stopping** on validation loss.  
- Tracks both training and validation metrics.  
- Can plot the result of the training

### 5. Post-processing
- **Gap filling**: short isolated predictions are corrected (`fill_label_gaps`).  
- **Segment merging**: continuous non-zero predictions are grouped (`find_nonzero_segments`).  
- Export results to `.txt` in the same format as ground-truth labels.  

### 6. Visualization
- `show_data()` overlays ground-truth annotations and predictions.  
- Confusion matrix plotted with Seaborn.  

### 7. Inference (ONNX Export)
- Final model is exported to ONNX format for deployment.  

---

## Usage

### Install dependencies
- Development is done with PyCharm and poetry. You can open the project in pycharm and create a poetry venv
- to test, it's possible to install dependencies with pip
```bash
poetry install
# or 
pip install .
```

### Run training & testing
The main script (`tests/train_test_cnn.py`) performs:
1. Training on `AS_1.wav`.  
2. Validation split (30%).  
3. Testing on `23M74M.wav`.  
4. Gap-filling and segment merging.  
5. Visualization of signals + classification overlay.  
6. Saving the trained model to ONNX.  

```bash
python tests/train_test_cnn.py
```

---

## Example Output
- **Classification report** (precision/recall/F1 per class).  
- **Confusion matrix** heatmap.  
- **Plots** showing bowel sounds with predicted vs. true labels.  

---

## Model Export (ONNX)
After training:
```python
example_inputs = (torch.randn(1, 480),)
onnx_program = torch.onnx.export(model.to('cpu'), example_inputs, dynamo=True)
onnx_program.save("saved_models/BowelSoundCNN.onnx")
```
---

### Using the Exported ONNX Model
- Once the CNN has been trained and exported to ONNX format, you can load and run inference with [ONNX Runtime](https://onnxruntime.ai/).  
An example script is provided in [`load_and_test_cnn.py`](tests/load_and_test_cnn.py).
---

## Results
- Achieves reasonable accuracy on small dataset (~70–80% overall).  
- Detects bursts reliably, harmonic class more challenging due to imbalance.  
- Post-processing improves temporal consistency of predictions.  

---

## Future Work
- Hyperparameter tuning (learning rate, segment size, overlap).  
- Better labelling (the current labelling seems unreliable)
- Try by predicting noise vs no-noise (as in Wang., 2022) and then create another classifier to distinguish the type of noise
- Explore recurrent/transformer-based models for temporal dependencies.
- Larger annotated dataset for better generalization.  

---

## Bibliography
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8729116/

Commit message:

Updated README for installation and adding data

README.md, after:

# Bowel Sound Classification – Digehealth Interview Project

This repository contains an end-to-end solution for **automatic classification of bowel sounds (BS)** using deep learning.  
The project was developed as part of a technical interview for **Digehealth**.  

---

## Problem Statement
Bowel sounds are typically classified into:
- **0 – No sound (silence / noise)**
- **1 – Burst noise (b / mb)**
- **2 – Harmonic noise (h)**  

The goal is to build a **robust classification pipeline** that:
1. Loads and preprocesses raw audio recordings. Make sure the files have same sampling rate by decimating to 8000 Hz.  
2. Segments the audio into short windows (like spectrogram frames).  
3. Trains a **CNN-based classifier** with a first transformation into Mel-spectrogram (Wang et al., 2022).
4. Evaluates the model on a separate test file.  
5. Exports the trained model to **ONNX** for deployment.  

---

## Project Structure

```
src/
 ├── rc_digehealth_test/
 │    ├── classifiers/       # CNN model definition + training loop
 │    ├── preprocessors/     # Filtering utilities (Butterworth)
 │    ├── utils/             # File loader, segmentation, gap filling, period detection
 │
tests/
 ├── train_test_cnn.py       # Main training + evaluation + visualization script
 └── ...
```

---

## Main Components

### 1. Data Handling (`DigeHealthFile`)
- Loads `.wav` audio files (optionally decimated to 8 kHz).  
- Loads `.txt` annotation files with **start, end, label**.  
- Provides segmentation via sliding windows (`get_segmented_data`).  
- Options:
  - Window size (`segment_size_sec`)  
  - Hop size in second (`hop`)  
  - Normalization (z-score)
  - Label grouping (`b` + `mb` → burst noise)  

### 2. Preprocessing (`ButterFilter`)
- High-pass or band-pass **Butterworth filtering** to remove low-frequency noise.  
- Implemented with `scipy.signal.sosfiltfilt` 
- The Filter classes have an apply method that is called by the objects to which the filter is given

### 3. CNN Classifier (`BowelSoundCNN`) based on (Wang et al., 2022)
- input: Tensors of shape (N, 480). 480 corresponds to 60 milliseconds at sampling rate 8000
- Transformation: Mel-spectrograms (128 bands × short time frames).  
- Architecture:
  - 3 convolutional + ReLU + max-pool blocks  
  - Dropout  
  - Fully-connected layer (64)  
  - Output layer with softmax over 3 classes (noise, burst, harmonic).  

### 4. Training (`train_model`)
- Loss: Cross-entropy.  
- Optimizer: Adadelta (as in the reference paper)
- Class imbalance handled via **WeightedRandomSampler**.  
- **Early stopping** on validation loss.  
- Tracks both training and validation metrics.  
- Can plot the result of the training

### 5. Post-processing
- **Gap filling**: short isolated predictions are corrected (`fill_label_gaps`).  
- **Segment merging**: continuous non-zero predictions are grouped (`find_nonzero_segments`).  
- Export results to `.txt` in the same format as ground-truth labels.  

### 6. Visualization
- `show_data()` overlays ground-truth annotations and predictions.  
- Confusion matrix plotted with Seaborn.  

### 7. Inference (ONNX Export)
- Final model is exported to ONNX format for deployment.  

---

## Usage

### Install dependencies
- Development is done with PyCharm and poetry. You can open the project in pycharm and create a poetry venv
- to test, it's possible to install dependencies with pip
- The current project will install PyTorch for GPU. You need a graphic card with a working CUDA installation
```bash
poetry install
# or 
pip install .
```

### Add data files
- The data files need to go in the test-data folder ```test-data/```. Refer to the README in there.

### Run training & testing
The main script (`tests/train_test_cnn.py`) performs:
1. Training on `AS_1.wav`.  
2. Validation split (30%).  
3. Testing on `23M74M.wav`.  
4. Gap-filling and segment merging.  
5. Visualization of signals + classification overlay.  
6. Saving the trained model to ONNX.  

```bash
python tests/train_test_cnn.py
```

---

## Example Output
- **Classification report** (precision/recall/F1 per class).  
- **Confusion matrix** heatmap.  
- **Plots** showing bowel sounds with predicted vs. true labels.  

---

## Model Export (ONNX)
After training:
```python
example_inputs = (torch.randn(1, 480),)
onnx_program = torch.onnx.export(model.to('cpu'), example_inputs, dynamo=True)
onnx_program.save("saved_models/BowelSoundCNN.onnx")
```
---

### Using the Exported ONNX Model
- Once the CNN has been trained and exported to ONNX format, you can load and run inference with [ONNX Runtime](https://onnxruntime.ai/).  
An example script is provided in [`load_and_test_cnn.py`](tests/load_and_test_cnn.py).
---

## Results
- Achieves reasonable accuracy on small dataset (~70–80% overall).  
- Detects bursts reliably, harmonic class more challenging due to imbalance.  
- Post-processing improves temporal consistency of predictions.  

---

## Future Work
- Hyperparameter tuning (learning rate, segment size, overlap).  
- Better labelling (the current labelling seems unreliable)
- Try by predicting noise vs no-noise (as in Wang., 2022) and then create another classifier to distinguish the type of noise
- Explore recurrent/transformer-based models for temporal dependencies.
- Larger annotated dataset for better generalization.  

---

## Bibliography
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8729116/
